Merge updates (#2933)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/eth2/merge/index.md

- **Developers**: upgrading the EVM to be more flexible.

Plus many more.

[More on Ethereum1.x](/learn/#eth-1x)

These improvements all have a place in Eth2 so it’s likely that their progress may affect the timing of the merge. -->

## After the merge {#after-the-merge}

This will signal the end of proof-of-work for Ethereum and start the era of a more sustainable, eco-friendly Ethereum. 
At this point Ethereum will be one step closer to achiving the full scale, security and sustainability outlined in its [Eth2 vision](/eth2/vision/).

## Relationship between upgrades {#relationship-between-upgrades}

The Eth2 upgrades are all somewhat interrelated. So let’s recap how the merge relates to the other upgrades.

### The merge and the Beacon Chain {#docking-and-beacon-chain}

Once the merge happens, stakers will be assigned to validate the Ethereum mainnet. [Mining](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/) will no longer be required so miners will likely invest their earnings into staking in the new proof-of-stake system.

<ButtonLink to="/eth2/beacon-chain/">The Beacon Chain</ButtonLink>

### The merge and shard chains {#docking-and-shard-chains}

> Originally, plans were made to implement shard chains prior to the incorporation of the Ethereum mainnet as a primary means of scaling. As research and development of layer 2 scaling solutions have boomed, the priority of core Ethereum devs shifted to expediting the switch a fully proof-of-stake driven mainnet. This means that the remaining shard chains will not be complete prior to switching mainnet to proof-of-stake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Originally, plans were made to implement shard chains prior to the incorporation of the Ethereum mainnet as a primary means of scaling. As research and development of [layer 2 scaling solutions](/developers/docs/layer-2-scaling/) have boomed, the priority of core Ethereum devs shifted to expediting the switch a fully proof-of-stake driven mainnet. This means that the remaining shard chains will not be complete prior to switching mainnet to proof-of-stake.
```

> Originally, plans were made to implement shard chains prior to the incorporation of the Ethereum mainnet as a primary means of scaling. As research and development of layer 2 scaling solutions have boomed, the priority of core Ethereum devs shifted to expediting the switch a fully proof-of-stake driven mainnet. This means that the remaining shard chains will not be complete prior to switching mainnet to proof-of-stake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Originally, the plan was to work on shard chains before the merge – to address scalability. However, with the boom of [layer 2 scaling solutions](/developers/docs/layer-2-scaling/), the priority has shifted to swapping proof-of-work to proof-of-stake via the merge.
```

> Originally, plans were made to implement shard chains as a primary means of scaling before implementing the merge. As research and development of [layer 2 scaling solutions](/developers/docs/layer-2-scaling/) have boomed, Ethereum core developers have shifted to prioritize the switch to a fully proof-of-stake driven mainnet. This means that the remaining shard chains will not be complete when Ethereum mainnet switches to proof-of-stake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Originally, the plan was to work on shard chains before the merge – to address scalability. However, with the boom of [layer 2 scaling solutions](/developers/docs/layer-2-scaling/), the priority has shifted to swapping proof-of-work to proof-of-stake via the merge.
```

lang: en
template: eth2
sidebar: true
image: ../../../assets/eth2/merge.png
summaryPoints:
  [
    'Eventually the current Ethereum mainnet will "merge" with the beacon chain proof-of-stake system.',
    "This will mark the end of proof-of-work for Ethereum, and the full transition to proof-of-stake.",
    "This is planned to preceed the roll out of shard chains.",
    'We formerly referred to this as "the docking."',
  ]
---

<UpgradeStatus date="~2021/22">

>     This upgrade is currently planned to follow the London upgrade, which is coming in the summer of 2021. It represents the disabling of proof-of-work mining, and upgrades the Ethereum you know and love today to a network secured by staked ether. An exciting step in realizing the <a href="/eth2/vision/">Eth2 vision</a> – more scalability, security, and sustainability.

Reviewer 2: I feel like mentioning the London upgrade just poses more questions we don't answer at this point.

Reviewer 2: I find this second sentence quite hard to read, too many things going on. Can we simplify or break into some separate sentences?

Reviewer: Agreed, no need to mention London here.

</UpgradeStatus>

## What is the merge? {#what-is-the-docking}

It's important to remember that initially, the other Eth2 upgrades are being shipped separately from [mainnet](/glossary/#mainnet) - the chain we use today. Ethereum mainnet continues to be secured by [proof-of-work](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/), even while [the Beacon Chain](/eth2/beacon-chain/) runs in parallel using [proof-of-stake](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/). The merge is when these two systems finally come together.

Imagine Ethereum is a space ship that isn’t quite ready for an interstellar voyage. With the Beacon Chain the community has built a new engine and a hardened hull. When it’s time, the current ship will dock with this new system, merging into one ship, ready to put in some serious lightyears and take on the universe.

## Merging with mainnet {#docking-mainnet}

> When ready, Ethereum mainnet will "merge" with the Beacon Chain, becoming its own shard which uses proof-of-stake instead of [proof-of-work](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/).

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to hyphenate proof-of-work or proof-of-stake if they fall at the end of a sentence. See the rules here: https://www.grammarly.com/blog/hyphen/

Reviewer 2: this change is still outstanding

[More on Ethereum1.x](/learn/#eth-1x)

These improvements all have a place in Eth2 so it’s likely that their progress may affect the timing of the merge. -->

## After the merge {#after-the-merge}

This will signal the end of proof-of-work for Ethereum and start the era of a more sustainable, eco-friendly Ethereum. 

> !!!!!!! At this point Ethereum will have the scale, security and sustainability outlined in its [Eth2 vision](/eth2/vision/).

Reviewer 2: exclamation marks?

## Relationship between upgrades {#relationship-between-upgrades}

The Eth2 upgrades are all somewhat interrelated. So let’s recap how the merge relates to the other upgrades.

### The merge and the Beacon Chain {#docking-and-beacon-chain}

> Once the merge happens, stakers will be assigned to validate the Ethereum mainnet. [Mining](/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pow/mining/) will no longer be required so miners will likely invest their earnings into staking in the new proof-of-stake system.

Reviewer 2: should it be "the Ethereum mainnet" or just "Ethereum mainnet"?

Reviewer: I vote "Ethereum mainnet"

<ButtonLink to="/eth2/beacon-chain/">The Beacon Chain</ButtonLink>

### The merge and shard chains {#docking-and-shard-chains}

> Originally, plans were made to implement shard chains prior to the incorporation of the Ethereum mainnet as a primary means of scaling. As research and development of layer 2 scaling solutions have boomed, the priority of core Ethereum devs shifted to expediting the switch a fully proof-of-stake driven mainnet. This means that the remaining shard chains will not be complete prior to switching mainnet to proof-of-stake.

Reviewer 2: "Originally, the plan was to work on shard chains after the Beacon Chain went live – to address scalability. However, with the boom of [layer 2] solutions, the priority has shifted to swapping proof-of-work to proof-of-stake via the merge."

Should we mention rising energy concerns?

Reviewer 2: this content still doesn't read right. "Incorporation", "expediting", "prior" – all have simpler alternatives. I'd still like to see this paragraph simplified

Reviewer 2: I think I'd still like this changed.

Reviewer: Updated!

> Currently the plan remains for shard chains to be rolled out after mainnet has merged. This will be an ongoing assessment from the community as to the need for potentially multiple rounds of shard chains to allow for endless scalability.

Reviewer 2: this second sentence is hard to read. I'm not sure it's even needed on the merge page. Maybe just simplify paragraph to:

"Shard chains will become the focus of the community once mainnet has merged."

Reviewer 2: still outstanding
